Add Search Algorithm page to API docs (#1050)
WordPress/openverse-api: api/docs/reference/search_algorithm.md

## Terms

- "Document": The total queryable information representing a single work
  catalogued in Openverse.
- "Field": The individual queryable elements of a document. In the context of
  Openverse, these may be textual, numerical, or keywords.
- "Result relevance": An individual result is "relevant" to a search when it
  matches the expectations of the user for a given query. A result is irrelevant
  if it does not match the expectations of the user for that same query. For
  example, the query "bird watch" may produce pictures of a wrist watch with a
  bird clockface illustration _or_ could surface pictures related to the
  activity also known as "birding" (bird watching), due to stemming. In the case
  of this specific query, "bird watching" may not be relevant, despite being a
  technically correct match for the query given Openverse's current index
  configuration. Other relevancy issues may be caused by descriptions that are
  not related to the contents of an image. This often happens on Flickr where
  users sometimes include blog-like text in the description of an image that
  references things that happened outside of the context of the image itself.

> - "Result quality": A combination of relevance and other factors like the actual

Reviewer: Nice distinction! I haven't thought about result quality being different from the result relevance before.

Author: I had been tinkering with the idea in my head a bit but only when writing this document did I realise how important a distinction it actually is. We'll need to keep it in mind as we dive into improving search.

of our search including Elasticsearch's default stemming configuration, aside
from small adjustments documented in the
[text analysis and stemming](#text-analysis/tokenization) section below. The
"raw" index configuration can be found in the `es_mapping.py` module (see link
in [resources](#resources)). Information for how to understand the configuration
can be found in the
[Elasticsearch documentation for index configuration](https://www.elastic.co/guide/en/elasticsearch/reference/7.12/index-modules.html).

> **Note**: We also apply cluster-level configurations as part of our
> Elasticsearch deployment. These are intentionally not covered here as they
> primarily deal with cluster performance and are irrelevant to the way searches
> are executed.

## Text analysis/tokenization

> **Note**: A general understanding of
> [full-text search (Wikipedia)](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Full-text_search)
> and the concepts of
> ["stemming" (Wikipedia)](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Stemming) and
> ["tokenization" (Wikipedia)](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lexical_analysis#Tokenization)
> will be useful for understanding this section.

> Text analysis or tokenization is the broad process Elasticsearch follows to

Reviewer: I think the phrase "derive the index tokens" can be difficult for someone very new to search in general. If that is the target audience for this doc, we could add something like the following: 

To search texts, Elasticsearch builds an index structure where keys are tokens (words) and values are the items that contain these tokens: (_Small diagrams illustrating the index below have helped me greatly to understand what an index is_):
{
"cat": [image1, image4, image5],
"bird": [image2, image4]
}
To create such an index in Openverse, we split the original texts (in Openverse case, it can be the media title, description, tags) into tokens.

Author: I'd like to avoid trying to document the specific ways in which full text search work, which is why I linked the handful of Wikipedia pages above. If I added "Index" as a term in the terms list with a link to the [inverted index](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Inverted_index) Wikipedia entry, would that be sufficient? Something like:

> Index: A data structure used by Elasticsearch to quickly identify the queryable terms for a document. Specifically, an [inverted index](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Inverted_index).

As for who the intended audience is, I wrote this assuming a relatively technical audience, mostly because it is documentation in the codebase rather than documentation we would present on the website. I tried to make it accessible for technical people without prior knowledge of how full-text search works by adding links to helpful resources, but making it accessible to a fully non-technical audience would be a tall order.

derive the index tokens for a given text document. A significant aspect of this
for Openverse (and many applications) is
[stemming](https://www.elastic.co/guide/en/elasticsearch/reference/7.12/stemming.html).
When Elasticsearch performs a full text search, it is searching the derived
tokens, for which it has created quickly searchable index, rather than the
original text itself. This means that the text analysis configuration applied
has a significant impact on the way documents are searched and how relevance is
calculated.

Openverse only applies our custom text analysis configuration to the "title",

> "description", and "tags" fields. All other fields use the default analyser.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
"description", and "tags" fields. All other fields use the [standard analyzer](https://www.elastic.co/guide/en/elasticsearch/reference/7.17/analysis-standard-analyzer.html).
```

soon via Elasticsearch's internationalisation tools.

We primarily use the default English language stemming settings aside from
[minor changes (GitHub)](https://github.com/cc-archive/cccatalog-api/issues/574#issue-668091876)
present in the `es_mapping.py` configuration to address a specific issue with
the "anim" stem. We use the
[Snowball English stemmer](https://snowballstem.org/algorithms/porter/stemmer.html)
and
[Lucene's possessive English stemmer](https://lucene.apache.org/core/8_8_0/analyzers-common/org/apache/lucene/analysis/en/EnglishPossessiveFilter.html).

The rationale for this specific stemmer configuration is not documented aside
from the "anim" stem issue linked above.

Openverse also applies the `lowercase` text analysis filter making our indexes
case-insensitive.

## Search execution

There are essentially 2 broad types of "full-text" searches available via the
Openverse API:

1. General "query" searching, which applies a simple text query search against
   several, non-configurable fields.
2. Individual field querying, which enables searching specific fields with
   independent query terms.

> Both of these search types also allow further keyword filtering along the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Both of these search types also allow further filtering of the results by the
```

Reviewer: Added a suggestion because I feel like "keyword filtering" is not a very clear term (for someone without the knowledge of ES-specific terms)

Author: I added a term for "Keyword field" in the terms list. Keywords are a big part of how Openverse searches documents, so it seems like something worth understanding when reading this document. Let me know if I should add additional external resources for the concept of a "keyword" field. I did remove the word "along" though to simplify the text, thank you for the suggestion.

following fields:

- Extension
- Category
- Length
- Aspect ratio
- Size
- Source
- License

Source is the only field for which you can currently also specify exclusions.

By default, items marked "mature" are excluded, but these can also be enabled.

See the following API documentation links for descriptions and options for each
field:

- [Audio search](https://api.openverse.engineering/v1/#operation/audio_search)
- [Image search](https://api.openverse.engineering/v1/#operation/image_search)

Each of these fields are searched relatively strictly, primarily because the
search domain in each is very small and "keyword" like. That is, there is a
limited and specific set of terms that appear for the relevant document fields
for each of these query parameters. All of them are validated to only allow
specific options (documented in the API documentation links above), which

> enforces the "keyword" like nature of their usage.

Reviewer: For example, the aspect ratio has the following set of possible values: `square`, `tall`, and `wide`. If you filter by "tall" aspect ratio, you will only get the results that are "tall"; all of the "square" and "wide" items will be discarded from the search results.

Reviewer: An example like this can help understand what "keyword" filtering is.

Author: Hopefully addressed by the additional term I added. Let me know if not.

### General "query" searching

This is the type of searching most commonly used to query Openverse. It is
activated when the `q` query parameter is present. It searches the following
aspects of a document:

- Description
- Title
- Tags

> **Note**: The API does not currently surface the "description" field, though
> [discussion is underway](https://github.com/WordPress/openverse-catalog/issues/364)
> to potentially change this fact.

Of these, title is weighted 10000 times more heavily than the description and
tags. This makes searches that match a title very closely rise to the "top" of
the results, even if the same text is present word-for-word in a description. It

> also breaks ties between documents, if for example two documents are returned,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
also breaks ties between documents, if, for example, two documents are returned,
```

one because the title matches and one because a tag matches, the title-matched
document will be ranked higher and therefore appear first.

Additionally, if the query is wrapped in double quotes (`"`), we search each of
these _exactly_ which will bypass stemming and match exact word order. Title
weighting is still applied in this case. This means that if the exact query text
is found in the title of one document and the description of another, the
title-matched document will appear ahead of the description-matched document.

### Individual field querying

This type of search is not commonly used. The Openverse frontend only surfaces
one of the subset of fields that are queryable in this approach. It is only

> available if the `q` query parameter is excluded. In other words, even if the
> request includes these query parameters, _the API ignores these options if the
> `q` query parameter is present_. In that case, it will execute the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
available if the `q` query parameter is excluded. In other words, if the
request includes the `q` query parameters, _the API will ignore these options
even if they are present in the request_. In that case, it will execute the
```

Author: Much clearer, thank you.

[general "query" search](#general-query-searching) described above. Future work
may surface the possibility for combining general querying and individual field
querying.

These are the fields currently supported for individual field querying:

- Creator
- Title
- Tags

> **Note**: The "tags" filter applies to the `name` field of the tags. No other
> aspect of the tags is currently searchable.

> Each of these can be stacked. You can make a request that queries for a specific

Reviewer: I didn't know this!

field querying.

## Document scoring

Aside from the aforementioned weighting of document "title" matches, Openverse
also includes one other attempt at scoring documents to improve search relevancy
and quality. Future improvements to Openverse's search relevancy will most
likely involve changes to how we score documents. For example, we may score
documents higher if they are determined to be popular results in Openverse
itself.

### Provider supplied popularity

Some providers supply a "popularity" rating for individual works. We ingest this
data and calculate a normalised "popularity" score named `rank_feature`. Flickr
is one of the providers that supplies this information. This data is used so
that works that are popular on the provider side, are ranked higher in Openverse
as well. The assumption here is that works that are popular on the provider's
own website are likely higher quality and therefore more desirable results.
Whether this has a significant impact on result relevancy or quality has not
been measured, in part due to loose definitions of "relevancy" and "quality" and
in part because we do not currently have tools for measuring user perception of

> a results relevancy or quality.

Reviewer: I was going to say that we should add a note on the ["authority_boost"](https://github.com/WordPress/openverse-api/blob/2fb82a725b37f2c43c8ad2f2e8939047bb82ee2b/ingestion_server/ingestion_server/elasticsearch_models.py#L167), but I guess we only calculate it during the ingestion, and never use for search ranking? It seems that only the popularity boosting is used, which makes the images from providers who have popularity (Wikimedia) rank much higher than GLAM images 🤔 

https://github.com/WordPress/openverse-api/blob/2fb82a725b37f2c43c8ad2f2e8939047bb82ee2b/api/catalog/api/controllers/search_controller.py#L377

Reviewer 2: Authority boosting is not currently enabled, that is correct.
